add external istiod initial documentation (#8403)
istio/istio.io: content/en/docs/setup/additional-setup/external-controlplane/index.md

   name: external-istiod-vs
   namespace: external-istiod
spec:
   hosts:
   - $REMOTE_ISTIOD_ADDR
   gateways:
   - external-istiod-gw
   http:
   - match:
     - port: 15012
     route:
     - destination:
         host: istiod.external-istiod.svc.cluster.local
         port:
           number: 15012
   - match:
     - port: 15017
     route:
     - destination:
         host: istiod.external-istiod.svc.cluster.local
         port:
           number: 443
---
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: DestinationRule
metadata:
 name: external-istiod-dr
 namespace: external-istiod
spec:
 host: istiod.external-istiod.svc.cluster.local
 trafficPolicy:
   portLevelSettings:
   - port:
       number: 15012
     tls:
       mode: SIMPLE
     connectionPool:
       http:
         h2UpgradePolicy: UPGRADE
   - port:
       number: 443
     tls:
       mode: SIMPLE
EOF
{{< /text >}}

Apply the Istio configuration in `external_cluster`:

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl apply -f external-istiod-gw.yaml --context="${CTX_EXTERNAL_CLUSTER}"
{{< /text >}}

### Setup remote cluster

Generate the Istio configuration for `remote_cluster` and the `external-istiod` namespace:

{{< text bash >}}

> $ cat <<EOF > remote-config-cluster.yaml

Reviewer: Should specify:

1) the `remote` profile as the base
2) the cluster name
3) the network name (optional?)

Author: This should be addressed!  Thanks!  PTAL

---
title: Installing External Control Plane [experimental]
description: Install external control plane and remote config cluster.
weight: 46
keywords: [external,control,istiod,remote,config]
aliases:
    - /docs/setup/kubernetes/additional-setup/external-controlplane/
owner: istio/wg-environments-maintainers

> test: no

Reviewer: Should be yes? You're planning on testing it, right? This just controls the auto-generation of the snips.sh file.

Author: Yes, planning to test in this PR - https://github.com/istio/istio.io/pull/8431

---

> title: Installing External Control Plane [experimental]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: Install Istio with an External Control Plane [experimental]
```

description: Install external control plane and remote cluster.

> weight: 46

Reviewer 2: Why is weight 46? Should probably go to the end (weight: 80)

Author: Updated!

keywords: [external,control,istiod,remote]
owner: istio/wg-environments-maintainers
test: no
---

{{< warning >}}
This feature is actively in [development](https://github.com/istio/community/blob/master/FEATURE-LIFECYCLE.md) and is
considered `pre-alpha`.
{{< /warning >}}

## Introduction

> This guide walks you through the installation of an external control plane. The
> {{< gloss >}}external control plane{{< /gloss >}} [deployment model](/docs/ops/deployment/deployment-models/#control-plane-models)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This guide walks you through the installation of an {{< gloss >}}external control plane{{< /gloss >}}. The
external control plane [deployment model](/docs/ops/deployment/deployment-models/#control-plane-models)
```

enables mesh operators to install and manage mesh control planes on separate
external clusters. This deployment model allows a clear separation between mesh
operators and mesh admins. Istio mesh operators can run Istio control planes
for mesh admins while mesh admins control the configuration of the control
plane without worrying about installing or managing it.

## Requirements

### Clusters

This guide requires that you have two Kubernetes clusters with any of the
supported Kubernetes versions: {{< supported_kubernetes_versions >}}.

> The first cluster contains the {{< gloss >}}external control plane{{< /gloss >}} installed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first cluster contains the external control plane installed
```

> in the `external-istiod` namespace. This Istio control plane serves as the external control
> plane for the second cluster. An ingress gateway is installed in the `istio-system`
> namespace. The ingress gateway provides mesh sidecars access to the
> external control plane in the `external-istiod` namespace.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in the `external-istiod` namespace. An ingress gateway is also installed in the `istio-system`
namespace to provide mesh sidecars access to the external control plane.
```

The second cluster is a {{< gloss >}}remote cluster{{< /gloss >}} hosting the mesh.
Its Kubernetes API server also provides the configuration for the control plane (istiod)
running in the external cluster.

### API Server Access

The API Server in the remote cluster must be accessible to the external
control plane cluster. Many cloud providers make API Servers publicly accessible
via network load balancers (NLBs). If the API Server is not directly accessible, you will
have to modify the installation procedure to enable access. For example, the
[east-west](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/East-west_traffic) gateway used in
the multi-network and primary-remote configurations could also be used
to enable access to the API Server.

## Environment Variables

This guide will refer to two clusters named `external_cluster` and `remote_cluster`.
The following environment variables will be used throughout to simplify the instructions:

Variable | Description
-------- | -----------

> `CTX_EXTERNAL_CLUSTER` | The context name in the default [Kubernetes configuration file](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/access-application-cluster/configure-access-multiple-clusters/)used for accessing the external control plane cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`CTX_EXTERNAL_CLUSTER` | The context name in the default [Kubernetes configuration file](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/access-application-cluster/configure-access-multiple-clusters/) used for accessing the external control plane cluster.
```

`CTX_REMOTE_CLUSTER` | The context name in the default [Kubernetes configuration file](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/access-application-cluster/configure-access-multiple-clusters/) used for accessing the remote cluster.
`EXTERNAL_ISTIOD_ADDR` | The host name for the `remote_cluster` to access the external control plane.
`SSL_SECRET_NAME` | The secret name used to access the ingress gateway on the external control plane cluster.

For example:

{{< text bash >}}
$ export CTX_EXTERNAL_CLUSTER=external_cluster
$ export CTX_REMOTE_CLUSTER=remote_cluster
$ export REMOTE_ISTIOD_ADDR=myexternal-istiod.cloud.com
$ export SSL_SECRET_NAME=myexternal-istiod-secret
{{< /text >}}

## Setup

> ### Setup the external control plane cluster

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Setup the external cluster
```

> Create the Istio configuration for `external_cluster`, using the default profile
> with the following ports on the ingress gateway to expose the external control plane:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Create the configuration for the ingress gateway that exposes the external control plane ports to other clusters:
```

{{< text bash >}}
$ cat <<EOF > controlplane-gateway.yaml
apiVersion: install.istio.io/v1alpha1
kind: IstioOperator
metadata:
  namespace: istio-system
spec:
  components:
    ingressGateways:
      - name: istio-ingressgateway
        enabled: true
        k8s:
          service:
            ports:
              - port: 15021
                targetPort: 15021
                name: status-port
              - port: 15012
                targetPort: 15012
                name: tls-xds
              - port: 15017
                targetPort: 15017
                name: tls-webhook
EOF
{{< /text >}}

> Apply the configuration in `external_cluster` in the `istio-system` namespace:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Apply the configuration in the `istio-system` namespace of `external_cluster`:
```

{{< text bash >}}
$ istioctl apply -f controlplane-gateway.yaml --context="${CTX_EXTERNAL_CLUSTER}"
{{< /text >}}

> Create the Istio network configuration to expose the **yet to be installed** external
> istiod on the ingress gateway in the `istio-system` namespace:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Create the Istio `Gateway`, `VirtualService`, and `DestinationRule` configuration for the **yet to be installed** external
control plane in the `istio-system` namespace:
```

Author: I would remove the **in the `istio-system` namespace** at the end, if you want to reword this way because the external control plane doesn't run in the istio-system ns.

        number: 15017
        protocol: https
        name: https-WEBHOOK
      tls:
        mode: SIMPLE
        credentialName: $SSL_SECRET_NAME
      hosts:
      - "$REMOTE_ISTIOD_ADDR"
---
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1beta1
kind: VirtualService
metadata:
   name: external-istiod-vs
   namespace: external-istiod
spec:
    hosts:
    - $REMOTE_ISTIOD_ADDR
    gateways:
    - external-istiod-gw
    http:
    - match:
      - port: 15012
      route:
      - destination:
          host: istiod.external-istiod.svc.cluster.local
          port:
            number: 15012
    - match:
      - port: 15017
      route:
      - destination:
          host: istiod.external-istiod.svc.cluster.local
          port:
            number: 443
---
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: DestinationRule
metadata:
  name: external-istiod-dr
  namespace: external-istiod
spec:
  host: istiod.external-istiod.svc.cluster.local
  trafficPolicy:
    portLevelSettings:
    - port:
        number: 15012
      tls:
        mode: SIMPLE
      connectionPool:
        http:
          h2UpgradePolicy: UPGRADE
    - port:
        number: 443
      tls:
        mode: SIMPLE
EOF
{{< /text >}}

> Apply the Istio configuration in `external_cluster`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Apply the configuration on `external_cluster`:
```

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl apply -f external-istiod-gw.yaml --context="${CTX_EXTERNAL_CLUSTER}"
{{< /text >}}

> ### Setup remote cluster

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Setup the remote (mesh) cluster
```

> Generate the Istio configuration for `remote_cluster` and the `external-istiod` namespace:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Generate a remote Istio configuration in the `external-istiod` namespace:
```

{{< text bash >}}
$ cat <<EOF > remote-config-cluster.yaml
apiVersion: install.istio.io/v1alpha1
kind: IstioOperator
metadata:
 namespace: external-istiod
spec:
  profile: remote
  meshConfig:
    rootNamespace: external-istiod
    defaultConfig:
      discoveryAddress: $REMOTE_ISTIOD_ADDR:15012
      proxyMetadata:
        XDS_ROOT_CA: /etc/ssl/certs/ca-certificates.crt
        CA_ROOT_CA: /etc/ssl/certs/ca-certificates.crt
  components:
    pilot:
      enabled: false
    istiodRemote:
      enabled: true

  values:
    global:
      caAddress: $REMOTE_ISTIOD_ADDR:15012
      istioNamespace: external-istiod
      meshID: mesh1
      multiCluster:
        clusterName: remote_cluster
    istiodRemote:
      injectionURL: https://$REMOTE_ISTIOD_ADDR:15017/inject
    base:
      validationURL: https://REMOTE_ISTIOD_ADDR:15017/validate
EOF
{{< /text >}}

> Install the configuration in `remote_cluster`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Install the configuration on `remote_cluster`:
```

{{< text bash >}}
$ istioctl apply -f remote-config-cluster.yaml --context="${CTX_REMOTE_CLUSTER}"
{{< /text >}}

You may notice the ingress gateway in `remote_cluster` is not running yet.
This is expected until the external control plane is running, which you will install next.

> ### Setup external control plane in the control plane cluster

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Set up the control plane in the external cluster
```

> Create remote secret to allow external control plane in `external_cluster` to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Create a remote secret to allow the external control plane in `external_cluster` to
```

access the `remote_cluster`:

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl create sa istiod-service-account -n external-istiod --context="${CTX_EXTERNAL_CLUSTER}"
$ istioctl x create-remote-secret \
  --context="${CTX_REMOTE_CLUSTER}" \
  --type=config \
  --namespace=external-istiod | \
  kubectl apply -f - --context="${CTX_EXTERNAL_CLUSTER}"
{{< /text >}}

Generate the Istio configuration for the `external-istiod`

> namespace in `external_cluster`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
namespace of `external_cluster`:
```

Generate the Istio configuration for the `external-istiod`
namespace in `external_cluster`:

> {{< text bash >}}

Reviewer: Also need to specify cluster name and network here

Author: Updated with cluster name and mesh id.  left network out per our discussion

metadata:
  namespace: external-istiod
spec:
  meshConfig:
    rootNamespace: external-istiod
    defaultConfig:
      discoveryAddress: $REMOTE_ISTIOD_ADDR:15012
      proxyMetadata:
        XDS_ROOT_CA: /etc/ssl/certs/ca-certificates.crt
        CA_ROOT_CA: /etc/ssl/certs/ca-certificates.crt
  components:
    base:
      enabled: false
    ingressGateways:
    - name: istio-ingressgateway
      enabled: false
  values:
    global:
      caAddress: $REMOTE_ISTIOD_ADDR:15012
      istioNamespace: external-istiod
      operatorManageWebhooks: true
      meshID: mesh1
      multiCluster:
        clusterName: external_cluster
    pilot:
      env:
        INJECTION_WEBHOOK_CONFIG_NAME: ""
        VALIDATION_WEBHOOK_CONFIG_NAME: ""
EOF
{{< /text >}}

> Apply the Istio configuration in `external_cluster`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Apply the Istio configuration on `external_cluster`:
```

{{< text bash >}}
$ istioctl apply -f external-istiod.yaml --context="${CTX_EXTERNAL_CLUSTER}"
{{< /text >}}

### Validate the installation

> Confirm the Istio ingress gateway in `remote_cluster` is running.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Confirm the Istio ingress gateway is running on `remote_cluster`.
```

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl get pod -l app=istio-ingressgateway -n external-istiod --context="${CTX_REMOTE_CLUSTER}"
{{< /text >}}

> Deploy the helloworld sample in `remote_cluster` with a namespace
> has [automatic sidecar injection](/docs/setup/additional-setup/sidecar-injection/#automatic-sidecar-injection) enabled.
> The helloworld pods should reach running in a few seconds with sidecar injected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Deploy the `helloworld` sample on `remote_cluster` in a namespace with
has [automatic sidecar injection](/docs/setup/additional-setup/sidecar-injection/#automatic-sidecar-injection) enabled.
Wait a few seconds for the `helloworld` pods to be running with sidecars injected.
```

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl apply -f samples/helloworld/helloworld.yaml --context="${CTX_REMOTE_CLUSTER}"
$ kubectl get pod -l app=helloworld --context="${CTX_REMOTE_CLUSTER}"
{{< /text >}}

> Expose the helloworld application on the gateway:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Expose the `helloworld` application on the ingress gateway:
```

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl apply -f samples/helloworld/helloworld-gateway.yaml --context="${CTX_REMOTE_CLUSTER}"
{{< /text >}}

Follow [these instructions](/docs/examples/bookinfo/#determine-the-ingress-ip-and-port) to

> set `GATEWAY_URL`. Confirm you can access the hello application:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
set `GATEWAY_URL` and then confirm you can access the `helloworld` application:
```

{{< text bash >}}
$ curl -s "http://${GATEWAY_URL}/hello" | grep -o "Hello"
{{< /text >}}

> **Congratulations!** You successfully installed an external control plane that manages
> services running in the remote cluster!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Congratulations!** You successfully installed an external control plane and used it to manage
services running in a remote cluster!
```

---
title: Install Istio with an External Control Plane [experimental]

> description: Install external control plane and remote cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: Install an external control plane and remote cluster.
```

weight: 80
keywords: [external,control,istiod,remote]
owner: istio/wg-environments-maintainers
test: no
---

{{< warning >}}
This feature is actively in [development](https://github.com/istio/community/blob/master/FEATURE-LIFECYCLE.md) and is
considered `pre-alpha`.
{{< /warning >}}

## Introduction

This guide walks you through the installation of an {{< gloss >}}external control plane{{< /gloss >}}. The
external control plane [deployment model](/docs/ops/deployment/deployment-models/#control-plane-models)
enables mesh operators to install and manage mesh control planes on separate
external clusters. This deployment model allows a clear separation between mesh
operators and mesh admins. Istio mesh operators can run Istio control planes
for mesh admins while mesh admins control the configuration of the control
plane without worrying about installing or managing it.

{{< image width="75%"

>     link="external-controlplane.svg"

Reviewer 2: Nice picture 😄

Author: @nmittler helped to beautify it :)

## Environment Variables

This guide will refer to two clusters named `external_cluster` and `remote_cluster`.
The following environment variables will be used throughout to simplify the instructions:

Variable | Description
-------- | -----------
`CTX_EXTERNAL_CLUSTER` | The context name in the default [Kubernetes configuration file](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/access-application-cluster/configure-access-multiple-clusters/) used for accessing the external control plane cluster.
`CTX_REMOTE_CLUSTER` | The context name in the default [Kubernetes configuration file](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/access-application-cluster/configure-access-multiple-clusters/) used for accessing the remote cluster.
`EXTERNAL_ISTIOD_ADDR` | The host name for the `remote_cluster` to access the external control plane.
`SSL_SECRET_NAME` | The secret name used to access the ingress gateway on the external control plane cluster.

For example:

{{< text bash >}}
$ export CTX_EXTERNAL_CLUSTER=external_cluster
$ export CTX_REMOTE_CLUSTER=remote_cluster
$ export REMOTE_ISTIOD_ADDR=myexternal-istiod.cloud.com
$ export SSL_SECRET_NAME=myexternal-istiod-secret
{{< /text >}}

> ## Setup

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Cluster configuration
```

> ### Setup the external cluster

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Set up the external cluster
```

  kubectl apply -f - --context="${CTX_EXTERNAL_CLUSTER}"
{{< /text >}}

Generate the Istio configuration for the `external-istiod`
namespace of `external_cluster`:

{{< text bash >}}
$ cat <<EOF > external-istiod.yaml
apiVersion: install.istio.io/v1alpha1
kind: IstioOperator
metadata:
  namespace: external-istiod
spec:
  meshConfig:
    rootNamespace: external-istiod
    defaultConfig:
      discoveryAddress: $REMOTE_ISTIOD_ADDR:15012
      proxyMetadata:
        XDS_ROOT_CA: /etc/ssl/certs/ca-certificates.crt
        CA_ROOT_CA: /etc/ssl/certs/ca-certificates.crt
  components:
    base:
      enabled: false
    ingressGateways:
    - name: istio-ingressgateway
      enabled: false
  values:
    global:
      caAddress: $REMOTE_ISTIOD_ADDR:15012
      istioNamespace: external-istiod
      operatorManageWebhooks: true
      meshID: mesh1
      multiCluster:
        clusterName: remote_cluster
    pilot:
      env:
        INJECTION_WEBHOOK_CONFIG_NAME: ""
        VALIDATION_WEBHOOK_CONFIG_NAME: ""
EOF
{{< /text >}}

Apply the Istio configuration on `external_cluster`:

{{< text bash >}}
$ istioctl apply -f external-istiod.yaml --context="${CTX_EXTERNAL_CLUSTER}"
{{< /text >}}

> ### Validate the installation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Validate the installation
```

Confirm the Istio ingress gateway is running on `remote_cluster`.

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl get pod -l app=istio-ingressgateway -n external-istiod --context="${CTX_REMOTE_CLUSTER}"
{{< /text >}}

> Deploy the `helloworld` sample on `remote_cluster` in a namespace with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Deploy the `helloworld` sample on `remote_cluster` in a namespace that
```
